WIP Inclusive Planning and Logistics subsection (#3315)
the-turing-way/the-turing-way: book/website/collaboration/inclusive-events/inclusive-events-planning.md

This can involve hosting different events that are attended by people with lived experience and other members of the public, as well as researchers, clinical staff, 
and other professionals. 

This section provides guidance and considerations for how to design and host an inclusive event for a diverse audience of people with lived experience. 

The recommendations are not an exhaustive list, and it is always preferable to include a specific representative or person with lived experience in the event planning 
to ensure that your event is tailored to the needs of your specific attendees. 
Their inclusion in decision-making processes is essential to achieving an accessible and inclusive event.

(cl-inclusive-events-planning-intro)=
## Accessibility vs. Inclusion: What to focus on

When designing and organising an event, it can be easy to focus on the accessibility requirements of the venue and overlook the steps needed to make an event inclusive 
and enjoyable for all participants. 

We can think of this in terms of “Universal Design” which is about designing an event or environment so that it can be accessed, understood, and used by all people 

> regardless of their background, age, size, ability or disability. 

Author: Updated (and also used exactly that example)

I added in links to the universal design website and tried to weave it in so that folks don't feel pressured to read all about universal design in order to host events

> regardless of their background, age, size, ability or disability. 

Reviewer: That's great!

Organising an inclusive event is more than a legal requirement, it is about creating a more equitable, welcoming, and meaningful experience for all participants. 

(cl-inclusive-events-planning-logistics)=
## Planning - Logistics 

Planning an event involves many stages that can vary in length depending on the size and resources required. 
This section addresses some suggested areas for consideration for events that include people with lived experience as attendees. 

At each stage, your planning documents should reflect an emphasis on accessible and inclusive universal design. 

(cl-inclusive-events-initial-planning)=
## Initial Planning 

An event that will be attended by people with lived experience may be different to events run without inclusivity in mind. 

Being inclusive at the planning stages ensures that people without lived experience are not making decisions without the input of people with lived experience. 
In particular, actively involving a community representative or person with lived experience in the event planning process will help to ensure both a diverse 

> perspective, and that the accessibility requirements unique to your attendees are identified. 

Author: Added in a call out block and note :)

> perspective, and that the accessibility requirements unique to your attendees are identified. 

Reviewer: Perfect, thanks! 🙏

During the initial planning, organiziers can prioritize inclusion by deciding how accessibility requirements are going to be met at a level suitable for all attendees. 
This suitable level should be discussed and defined by people with lived experience and the specific accessibility need. 
This includes considering physical and cognitive accessibility, communication needs, and any other accommodations necessary. 

Finally, when developing the event agenda, make sure it is inclusive of all attendees. Consider various perspectives, backgrounds, and needs, to create an agenda that 
fosters an inclusive and engaging experience for everyone involved.

(cl-inclusive-events-power-dynamics)=
### Addressing Power Dynamics

Acknowledging and addressing the power and privilege differences between members of the public and researchers is an important part of creating an inclusive 
environment where people with lived experience are able to engage equitably at an event. 

It can be helpful to acknowledge that people with lived experience are "experts by experience" to help establish equal footing with professionals and researchers who 
are "experts by profession". 

> Your event may be the first research or formal event attended by people with lived experience and members of the public, and they may not have pursued higher education 

Author: makes total sense. This wording of far better.

Please refer to your organization's policy on data protection and privacy and seek advice from your Data Protection Officer. 

(cl-inclusive-events-planning-budget)=
### Budget

Attending and organizing events can place a large financial strain on all parties involved, and can cause the unintentional exclusion of many people with lived experience who may be engaging in projects as a volunteer. 
This section highlights considerations that event organizers can make to increase the inclusion of an event, however, we would like to acknowledge that not all of these recommendations are possible to implement for every event. 
Please work with your team and the resources available to address the most urgent needs of your attendees and use this section as a starting point for discussion.

Some areas of consideration may be:

(cl-inclusive-events-planning-tickets)=
#### Ticket Pricing

If your event is ticketed, ticket prices should be set thoughtfully and may consider having different tiers of pricing in addition to setting aside low-cost or complimentary tickets for carers and those experiencing financial hardship.

(cl-inclusive-events-planning-honorarium)=

> #### Honorarium and Bursaries 

Reviewer: Maybe also worth pointing out here that if the event is done within a large organisation it will require some policy work before the event 😂

Reviewer: Yeah, I think just having that one sentence here makes sense to at least signpost the potential issue for now, and in the future there might be a different chapter on the topic of remuneration!

It is advisable to highlight who is responsible for payments, how any reimbursement procedures will work and their expected timeline, and clear guidance on what expenses will be covered. 

Please ensure that all documentation and communication about honorarium and reimbursements are written in an Easy Read format following plain language guidance and if possible, provide clear pathways on how to submit documents. 
People with lived experience may not have a printer in their homes and may share a computer or smartphone to take part in events. 
Where possible, please be mindful of the technology and process barriers that people may face and make processes as clear as possible.

```{admonition} Case Study
:class: tip
A community event attended by people with vision impairments requested a support person to type and guide them through a reimbursement form. 
While this may not be a requirement for all types of events, consider both the budget, communication, and the GDPR requirements that would be needed for a member of staff to support attendees with completing the forms. 
```

(cl-inclusive-events-planning-risk-assessment)=
### Risk Assessment

> Many organizations will require a risk assessment as part of planning an event and it is critical to consider the additional risks that may be unique to the attendees of your specific event. 

Reviewer: maybe also good to point out that even if the org itself doesn't require it that it can be a good exercise to think through potential risks?

as well as how to report concerns about safeguarding and manage disclosure at the event. Depending on your event, the disclosure of experiencing harm, as well as the medical conditions and health status of attendees, 
may be shared as part of discussion with people with lived experience. It is important to consider how you will handle potential disclosure and what you will do to uphold the personal safety of an 
individual who discloses personal information unknowingly in a public forum at your event. 

By creating a safeguarding policy that covers the reporting and escalation pathways and making this accessible to staff and attendees you will be better prepared to manage any events of disclosure 
and uphold the necessary safeguarding for your attendees. 

Please also remember that safeguarding applies to both attendees and staff and it is important to consider the physical and psychological safety of staff at your event, as well as your attendees.

(cl-inclusive-events-planning-before-event)=

> ## Before the Event

Reviewer: This confused me a bit now during the review, if only this bit is _before the event_, how does it differ from everything up to here? Would it be worth folding it in above? (tbf: this might just be a result of me reviewing directly in the raw markdown instead of a rendered version!)

Author: I think we can change the wording. 

I tried to separate out H2: initial planning i.e. 6months or longer before event, and the H2: before the event i.e. a few weeks before. 

I can revise the phrasing. It's a really weird semantic tangle to try say "pre-planning, planning, lead up planning, ... etc" as when does pre-planning become planning. 

I've have another think and see what I can come up with to make it less confusing.

Reviewer: Perfect, now I got the distinction! Maybe just adding those timelines in brackets after those in the headings could work as an easy fix? :)

Author: I also thought maybe "final planning considerations" could also work as a heading. It might be one that we get more feedback on and find what is clearest.

(cl-inclusive-events-planning)=
# Planning an Inclusive Event

> Running an event that is inclusive of all is more than just a choice; it’s a necessity to ensure that all your participants will be able to fully engage in the event. 

Reviewer 2: Running an event that is inclusive of all is more than just a choice; it’s a necessity to guarantee that all your participants will be able to fully engage in the event. 
```suggestion
Running an event that is inclusive of all is more than just a choice; it’s a necessity to ensure that all your participants will be able to fully engage in the event. 
```

> Running an event that is inclusive of all is more than just a choice; it’s a necessity to ensure that all your participants will be able to fully engage in the event. 

Reviewer 2: Running an event that is inclusive of all is more than just a choice; it’s a necessity to guarantee that all your participants will be able to fully engage in the event.
```suggestion
Running an event that is inclusive of all is more than just a choice; it’s a necessity to ensure that all your participants will be able to fully engage in the event. 
```

You could also consider hosting some focus group sessions at regular stages to get feedback on your plans.
Where possible, the expertise and labor of people with lived experience should be recognized and renumerated. 
```

To identify the event's purpose and outcomes, carefully consider your target audience and the reasons behind their inclusion. 
It is important at this stage to define and document the purpose of public involvement in the event alongside a representative or member of the public with lived experience (cite: NIHR public involvement guidance). 

It is important to clearly define the event's goals, understand the intended audience and potential attendees, and to emphasize the importance of including people with lived experiences throughout the event. 

During the initial planning, organiziers can prioritize inclusion by deciding how accessibility requirements are going to be met at a level suitable for all attendees. 
This suitable level should be discussed and defined by people with lived experience and the specific accessibility need. 
This includes considering physical and cognitive accessibility, communication needs, and any other accommodations necessary. 

> Finally, when developing the event agenda, make sure it is inclusive of all attendees. Consider various perspectives, backgrounds, and needs, to create an agenda that fosters an inclusive and engaging experience for everyone involved.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, when developing the event agenda, make sure it is inclusive of all attendees. 
Consider various perspectives, backgrounds, and needs, to create an agenda that fosters an inclusive and engaging experience for everyone involved.
```

(cl-inclusive-events-power-dynamics)=
### Addressing Power Dynamics
Acknowledging and addressing the power and privilege differences between members of the public and researchers is an important part of creating an inclusive environment where people with lived experience are able to engage equitably at an event. 

It can be helpful to acknowledge that people with lived experience are "experts by experience" to help establish equal footing with professionals and researchers who are "experts by profession". 

Your event may be the first event of this type attended by people with lived experience and members of the public, and they may not have pursued higher education compared with attendees who may be researchers by profession. 

> This can create a significant power imbalance due to comfort and experience at the event. Networking and social components of the event may feel less welcoming to people with lived experience if they do not know anyone before attending. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This can create a significant power imbalance due to comfort and experience at the event. 
Networking and social components of the event may feel less welcoming to people with lived experience if they do not know anyone before attending. 
```

When planning the dates for the event, it is also useful to consider the potential travel times of your attendees. 
If your event takes place in person, try to choose a date and start time that takes into account how long your attendees will need to travel. 
For example, having your event start at 10:30 a.m. allows for inter-city travel the morning before the event. 

(cl-inclusive-events-timeline-planning)=
#### Creating a Planning Timeline
Your planning timeline will vary greatly based on the scale of your event. 
We have highlighted areas where your timeline should take into account any considerations that would be specifically supportive of people with lived experience.

Although it is always necessary to allow for appropriate time to source speakers, people with lived experience may require more notice than is traditionally planned for in order to support their attendance and speak at an event. 
People with lived experience may have additional constraints such as medical appointments, caring responsibilities, support and travel needs, and preparation time which can require significant time in order to plan for and implement. 

> Try to identify potential speakers as early as possible and book dates in their diaries that would allow them to make plans that would support their engagement in the event.

Reviewer 2: Try to identify potential speakers as early as possible and book dates that facilitate their organization to participate in the event.
```suggestion
Try to identify potential speakers as early as possible and book dates in their diaries that would allow them to make plans that would support their engagement in the event.
```

Author: Hi @JFormoso. 

Are you suggestion that the speakers need to facilitate their employer/organization, or that they themselves need to get organized in order to take part in the event?

You can also arrange to have speakers join remotely if it would be more supportive of their engagement. 

`````{admonition} Case Study
:class: tip
The AI for Multiple Long Term Conditions Conference in April 2023 had a keynote speaker join and give their keynote address remotely in order to best support their involvement. 
People with the lived experience of multiple long-term conditions may find travelling to events taxing which can have a negative impact on their energy levels and ability to engage in daily activities. 
By supporting the speaker to speak remotely, they were able to give an engaging and thoughtful keynote address without the burden of having to travel. 
`````

(cl-inclusive-events-planning-GDPR)=
### GDPR and Data Protection
Depending on your location and organization, the collection of data during registration may be regulated and need additional considerations.

In the EU, GDPR (or the UK's version UK-GDPR) considers data concerning health conditions and disability as "special category data". 
This "special category" also extends to cover the data about a relative or carer of an individual with a health condition or disability. 

> Depending on the specific attendees and focus of your event, you may need to complete additional data protection forms and plan for how to manage the protected information. 

Reviewer 2: Depending on the specific attendees and focus of your event, you may need to complete additional data protection forms and establish a plan for managing the protected information.
```suggestion
Depending on the specific attendees and focus of your event, you may need to complete additional data protection forms and plan for how to manage the protected information. 
```

Author: Updated :)

> This includes dietary information and disability status as disclosed in registration forms. Data management and privacy procedures will differ between organizations, but it is important during planning to be aware that the information being collected may be special category and to establish a protocol for collecting and storing this information. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This includes dietary information and disability status as disclosed in registration forms. 
Data management and privacy procedures will differ between organizations, but it is important during planning to be aware that the information being collected may be special category and to establish a protocol for collecting and storing this information. 
```

This section highlights considerations that event organizers can make to increase the inclusion of an event, however, we would like to acknowledge that not all of these recommendations are possible to implement for every event. 
Please work with your team and the resources available to address the most urgent needs of your attendees and use this section as a starting point for discussion.

Some areas of consideration may be:

(cl-inclusive-events-planning-tickets)=
#### Ticket Pricing
If your event is ticketed, ticket prices should be set thoughtfully and may consider having different tiers of pricing in addition to setting aside low-cost or complimentary tickets for carers and those experiencing financial hardship.

(cl-inclusive-events-planning-honorarium)=
#### Honorarium and Bursaries 
Depending on the size of the budget and structure, creating a policy and the budget for an Accessibility Fund can help to make your event inclusive for all participants, regardless of their needs and circumstances. 

> This is a Fund that can be applied to cover additional costs that would support people with lived experience attending and engaging in your event. These additional costs could be: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is a Fund that can be applied to cover additional costs that would support people with lived experience attending and engaging in your event. 
These additional costs could be: 
```

- additional accommodation for people who may need to travel to an event the day prior, or stay longer, if attending in person due to health conditions.
- any travel costs or support for those with caring responsibilities to cover the cost of a support worker, childcare, or allowing their child to travel with them.
- honorarium for members of the public with lived experience to attend sessions. 
- honorariums for speakers, facilitators, and note-takers if they are needed for your event.
- support for accessibility requirements such as a Sign Language Interpreter.
- reimbursements for accessible transport (for example, taxis can often be more expensive than public transport but may be required depending on the location of your event).

It will be important to create a clear and understandable policy for what activities and costs can be covered by an Accessibility fund. 
Honorariums and Reimbursements may have separate policies and timelines, and it is important to be as transparent as possible in order to support people with lived experience engaging in your event. 

> It is advisable to highlight who is responsible for payments, how any reimbursement procedures will work and their expected timeline, and clear guidance on what expenses will be covered. The UK's National Institute for Health and Care Research has published [Guidance on Payment](https://www.nihr.ac.uk/documents/payment-guidance-for-researchers-and-professionals/27392) for researchers who need to cost public involvement activities at any stage of the research process that can be used as a reference for developing your event's honorarium policy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is advisable to highlight who is responsible for payments, how any reimbursement procedures will work and their expected timeline, and clear guidance on what expenses will be covered. 
The UK's National Institute for Health and Care Research has published [Guidance on Payment](https://www.nihr.ac.uk/documents/payment-guidance-for-researchers-and-professionals/27392) for researchers who need to cost public involvement activities at any stage of the research process that can be used as a reference for developing your event's honorarium policy.
```

> Please ensure that all documentation and communication about honorarium and reimbursements are written in an Easy Read format following plain language guidance and if possible, provide clear pathways on how to submit documents. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Please ensure that all documentation and communication about honorarium and reimbursements are written in an Easy Read format following Plain Language guidance and if possible, provide clear pathways on how to submit documents. 
```

The consideration and mitigation of risks will help to ensure that your event is accessible and welcoming to all attendees, and even if not required will be useful in planning and delivering an inclusive event.

(cl-inclusive-events-planning-staffing)=
### Personnel 
Planning for who will be facilitating and staffing the event will help to identify what capacity your event will have to provide direct support to people with lived experience. 

Consider what sessions your event will be running, and scope out who will be required to support attendees with lived experience engaging in the event. 
For example, facilitators who can moderate and chair conversations or discussion sessions and support equal participation, translators or interpreters for people with lived experience if the event is not hosted in their primary language where their input is critical to the event (this includes sign language interpreters), note takers, and support staff trained to support the specific needs of your attendees. 

> You can also consider setting up a dedicated email address that is active before and during the event for people to direct accessibility questions towards. For example during the event an attendee with low vision can email and ask for context on content that was shared during a live session. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can also consider setting up a dedicated email address that is active before and during the event for people to direct accessibility questions towards. 
For example, during the event an attendee with low vision can email and ask for context on content that was shared during a live session. 
```

Many of the technologies used every day by some people have never been used by others. 

We suggest preparing introductions or tutorials for the technologies used by your event. 
You can also consider hosting a "practice" session with your speakers and moderators before the event to ensure their familiarity and comfort. 

(cl-inclusive-events-planning-during-event)=
## At the Event

(cl-inclusive-events-planning-during-event-speakers)=
### Speakers and Moderators
For speakers and moderators, you should consider how you will support them before their sessions and if they would be best supported by having an opportunity to prepare in a "Green Room" or quiet room before the session. 
This is especially important for people with lived experience who may prefer to take medication in private, or may be newer to public speaking than their research colleagues.

Consider how you will set them up to hold a successful session whether that be hosting a practice session for them before attendees arrive, identifying some questions or topics they may want to avoid and helping to facilitate discussion, or by asking how they wish to be introduced to the attendees. 

> If your event overlaps with a meal time, consider if their ability to eat or take a break will be impacted. If your event is in person, try to communicate with catering and ensure that there is a meal or alternative food is sourced and held aside for them. 

Author: Fixed :)

(cl-inclusive-events-planning-during-event-tech)=
### Technology 

> Depending on your event and platform, it may be helpful to organize "backup" technology on the day of the event. For example having spare batteries and spare microphones, arranging an alternate host for Zoom, and providing PDFs instead of relying solely on online technology to communicate important information. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Depending on your event and platform, it may be helpful to organize "backup" technology on the day of the event. 
For example, having spare batteries and spare microphones, arranging an alternate host for Zoom, and providing PDFs instead of relying solely on online technology to communicate important information. 
```

This may not be feasible for all events and may be more important for in-person events, but it is important to consider how to make the event accessible and inclusive throughout. 
Inclusion can be planned for, but it also needs implementation and support to make it happen.

(cl-inclusive-events-planning-post-event)=
## After the Event
Consider if you are able to make content from the event accessible to attendees, or open to a wider audience, after the event. 

For events that have recorded sessions, this may be uploading the content to YouTube and ensuring that the captions have been reviewed and added to any video content. 
Having a human reviewer of captions can be helpful in catching any errors made by automatic captioning software and ensuring that content is of a good quality (such as editing out any audio glitches and flagging triggers for photosensitive epilepsy). 

If your event included content such as slides or documented notes, consider where and how you will archive them so that they can be accessed and referenced by attendees. 

> Online repositories such as Zenodo are commonly used by research communities but are not universally design-compliant and require both technical expertise and knowledge of how to use and access it as well as requiring an internet connection to access content. 

Author: Done :)

Consider using Zenodo in addition to an accessible format. 
This could be a website commonly visited by your attendees, sending post-event summary information to attendees, or providing recordings of sessions that display session content.

> Finally, for in-person events and related to safeguarding, consider how you will ensure that everyone is able to access return transport safely. 

Reviewer 2: Finally, for in-person events and related to safeguarding, anticipate, and prepare to guarantee everyone can access return transport.
```suggestion
Finally, for in-person events and related to safeguarding, anticipate, and prepare to guarantee everyone can access return transport.
```

This is particularly important to consider for attendees with lived experience and any disabilities that may make public transport more difficult to access. 

> Although your event may have formally finished, are there support pathways you can put in place such as arranging a coach or taxis to a train station, or by ending an event within daylight hours to ensure that attendees are not travelling in the dark? 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even after the event has formally concluded, make sure you are familiar with support options such as arranging coaches or taxis to a train station. Additionally, consider scheduling the event to end within daylight hours to enhance attendee safety and avoid travel in the dark.
```

Author: Hi @JFormoso!

Thank you for the suggestions, they're all really helpful. 

When you're making inline edits, would you be able to put each sentence on a new line?

Even while drafting, it's really helpful to align work to The Turing Way's [Style Guide](https://the-turing-way.netlify.app/community-handbook/style.html) 😄
